>> Jason Pamental: I just wanted to put
this up again just as a reminder of
this as a useful tool to figure
out what your font can do.
It doesn't have to be a variable font.
So any kind of font that you want to work
with, if you want to see if they're open
type features, any of those things,
you can just drag and drop on there.
And it'll analyze it for you and
give you a good low down on what's there.
Axis-Praxis is another one that I go
to all the time to test things out and
also because you can drag and
drop a font here as well.
And then access it and
turn features on and off.
So with this selected this text
block here, it automatically says,
it's Voto Serif and
it gives me the different sliders here and
it also tells me what
Open Type features are here.
So we've got fractions, so
we can just go ahead and
type in here and then we can
see they are not on by default.
But we can turn them on or
force them off or leave it standard.
Same thing is true with ligatures or
anything else that you see here.
So those are really helpful
things to kind of start to
get an understanding of
what you have to work with.
And what you have available
to you at a given time.
You can also then kinda play around
with tight pairings here pretty easily.
So you can do things like change
the type face that is in use.
In some of these different, excuse me,
different blocks to see
how things look together.
I wouldn't say it's necessarily
the most robust type setting platform.
But it does let you very quickly play
around with stuff and just kind of knock
things together and sort of prototype
your typography a little bit.
And it's really easy to use, and
you can always get that CSS,
you can edit the values here and
reapply it.
But it makes it real easy to poke around
with things and copy those resources, and
take them back into your own project.
>> Jason Pamental: I wanted to show you
a few of the other variable fonts, and
kind of what's interesting about them.
So you can see what's some of
the other things are available.
So David Jonathan Ross has been playing
around with colored fonts as well.
And it's got some really
incredible things that you can do.
That's another one of those things that's
not terribly well supported in browsers
just yet, but you can see a lot
of interesting things are coming.
Being able to, once it's fully supported,
actually specify and
change any of the colors that
are available in that font.
But you can kind of see what you can do
to play around with the thickness and
thinness of the interior stroke weight,
as well as the serifs themselves.
Roslindale is the one that I've been
working with on my own site, and
that's actually what I used
in a lot of my slides.
And you can see this one can actually
work pretty nicely as a text face, or
as something that's a little bit
heavier to use for headings.
>> Jason Pamental: So FF Meta was
the one that I used in another project.
You can see all the way from
a really super light hairline,
all the way up to something
really super heavy.
But some of the more interesting ones have
several other axes that you can play with.
And once you get into some of those
differences, I would like us to
find one here that offers, okay,
here's a little more crazy one.
You can set the wind
direction on this one, so
again, like the axis,
it can really be a lot of,
really can be kind of anything that the
type designer wants to play around with.
And because this is all regular text,
you're not really sacrificing
the readability for
somebody with assisstive devices.
You're just adding to the design.
Barlow's an interesting
one in that this one has
started to gain a lot of
popularity on Google fonts.
It's a pretty nice type face.
It's pretty versatile.
It's got a width and a weight axis and
it's got the numbering as a little
bit weird, but, that's okay.
And so the standard version is
available on Google Web Fonts, but
it's an open-source typeface.
You can download it from GitHub and
you can make a variable font out of it if
you have the right tools and
really do quite a lot with it.
I'm not exactly sure
what time of day is here,
but that's what they want to call it.
>> Jason Pamental: So
just wanna make sure that you can see that
it's not just for standard use typefaces.
You might have really
interesting calligraphic effects
that you can get just by
playing around with these.
So you can imagine that as a heading,
like on a clothing website, and
there's all different kinds of brands that
might be kind of an interesting effect.
Where you would vary the weight and
the swashes to really get a beautifully
sort of drawn effect on that when
the screen loads in in the first place.
So a lot of it is not necessarily how
you use it just in a static sense,
but because all these
things can be animated,
it actually can provide something
that moves and changes over time.
So as it loads and then it does something,
it gives you an opportunity to create
some really interesting effects.
So this is Bahnschrift, this is one
that actually ships in Windows 10.
And before they added the width
axis this thing was only 26K,
I mean, that's really incredible.
That's the size of like pretty
much any other standard font, but
it had a width from 300 to 700 and
a character set that's complete enough
to build into an operating system.
So I mean this was not a lightweight,
half-baked kind of thing.
This is a really well-engineered typeface.
>> Jason Pamental: So this is the crazy
of deck of ours, so I showed you one,
I do not even remember which one it was.
But this is just kind of a technology
demo where you can see this actually goes
from a serif to a sans serif, but
it changes the shape of the serifs.
You can have an inline stroke,
change the terminal shape,
the worm effect, whatever that is.
Flare things quite a bit more, so there's
a tremendous amount of variability.
And one of the reasons I like to show
this is think about people with dyslexia,
think about the challenges that they
face differentiating between characters.
And when everybody's using something
like Open Sans that has really somewhat
nondescript characters being able to do
something like subtly shape the terminals.
Or the tops of the ascenders or
descenders to make the B ad D
slightly more differentiated.
That's an accessibility switch
that would make night and
day difference to somebody with that
kind of reading comprehension issue.
So there's a difference between
being able to use something and not.
So I think that's another one of
the potential uses of variable fonts,
is to put more control on
the hands of the user.
Now, it is a challenging notion
because that means giving up more
control as a designer,
but in a controlled way.
So you're defining the space, you're
giving people the controls to use, and
you're allowing them to have
some flexibility in how
they take in that content.
It's not so different than having to
deal with different length headings.
Again, we have to give up a little
bit of the explicit control
to give people a more
define way to interact
because ultimately our job is to
help them get to that content.
So again, anything that we
can do to make that easier,
whether it's increasing
the grade of the text,
allowing them to change the shape
of the letters a little bit.
Or for people that suffer from crowding,
which is a subset of people with dyslexia.
Microsoft research found that if
you increase the line height and
the word spacing, you could increase
reading comprehension by 50% for
people with that condition.
That's all standard CSS.
So that's a button somebody could push
to completely change the way they could
interact with that content.
And again, make the difference
between a child learning and not.
That's really powerful, that's stuff
we can do with design, with CSS,
with these variable fonts,
things that were never before possible.
That's why I really like just being in
this time of experimentation to see
what's possible and just having all these
things to play with is really tremendous.
I did just gloss over the poop emoji.
This was a demonstration of a color font.
Actually, by my friend Rule that made that
other bot website that we were looking at.
So here's Amstalvar.
And here are all the different axis.
So this is the one that's in many of
the demos that we have to play with and
you can see it's got
the standard sort of width and
weight stuff that's
interesting to play with.
But the optical size you can see
the extreme differences that
you can achieve with that.
So that's useful for physical size but
it's also useful for
just changing the nature of
the character of the font.
So if you don't really
want that fine detail,
you can just force the optical size using
font variation settings to set it to
a specific value if you would really
prefer to have that heavier effect.
And that's just fine,
it's totally up to you.
But there's fun things that you can do
to change the shape of the serifs, so
you can see how that's kind of moving and
changing.
Sort of changes the effect of it.
Now,
>> Jason Pamental: Following along
with why transparent and why opaque and
etcetera mean,
is a little bit kind of hard to follow.
But you can see there is like the change
in the heights of the ascenders and
the descenders.
So you can play around with
things visually, but also
in terms of copy fitting and type setting,
that gives you a lot to play with.
And,
>> Jason Pamental: Also separately
the height of the upper case letters, so
it actually gives you
an awful lot of stuff.
It's not likely that you will
find many type faces that have
this much to play with.
And it is also going to mean that
that's not going to be the skinniest
font that you could load.
The more axes of variation,
the larger the font file,
so that's probably not going to be
the best answer for a lot of uses.
Typically, you're probably gonna
see one to three axes of variation
as the most common.
That's, frankly, hard enough, but it
does give you an awful lot to play with.
>> Jason Pamental: Well,
>> Jason Pamental: Having more or
less Cookies, more or
less fringe, all good things.
>> Jason Pamental: No,
that's not really doing much.
So there's some different examples,
the v-fonts site is really pretty fun and
that's gonna show you
where to get them as well.
So all those things are really
nice to be able to see and
figure out where you can find more.
Some of them are for sale,
some of them are commercial.
So this is Danbar, I use this as
a text phase in my presentation.
This is what I meant about
playing around with the x height.
You can go from really art deco to really
super modern, or somewhere in the middle.
>> Jason Pamental: So
those are some of the main ones.
Interesting of note,
San Francisco was really
sorta-kinda one of the first
true variable fonts.
It wasn't exposed to the end user, but
that's actually been very similar to
what's been under the hood since that was
introduced into the operating system.
That's essentially how they built it, and
that's why a lot of that sort of fed into
the eventual technology that drove
the evolution of the standard.